---
layout:     post
title:      "How to Write An Assembler in Haskell, Part 1"
date:       2020-01-02
excerpt:    "This explains the motivation for writing a new Z80 assembler in the 20th century"
tags:       [programming, Z80, assembler, tutorial, Haskell]
feature:    /assets/snesaa/02/saa02_featurecard.gif
published:  false
comments:   true
---
# DRAFT

Spoilers: There's no code in this post. It only explains my motivation to tackle writing a new assembler. If you want to get practical, jump to part 2 right away.

### Introduction, or: Why I Don't Like Your Assembler

As avid readers may have noticed, I like assembly programming. I've several times tried to branch into other consoles and systems like the Atari ST, Game Boy, Genesis/Megadrive, Amiga, etc.

All these endeavors all ended in frustration. Most of the time, for the same reason: I found the available tools to be inadequate to my needs. This is not to say that they're bad. They're well designed and for the most part, do what they advertise they do - assemble code for cross-platform development.

But I find myself longing for the simple assembler-linker combination cc65 offers. I think .include and .org instructions (and their cousins) are horrible; they make modularity harder to achieve, prevent you from taking advantage of concepts like relocatable code, re-entrant subroutine design, etc.

I think assembler-linker combinations are preferable to assemblers that obfuscate code by introducing assembler directives into the code that do not affect the functionality of the code at all - you don't write your makefile into your C/C++ headers, so why is it okay to do so with assembly code?

The second problem is, I like to automate my builds. Be it with make, CMake, or -best of all- tup, I want to set up my project once and know it will build (as long as my code is correct, that is). There's no black sorcery involved in turning source files into linkable objects (allegedly). Which is to say, I want a linker. It is not my job as a programmer to correctly resolve labels, variable addresses, subroutine calls, return addresses, etc. That's exactly why we have linkers.

The cc65 toolchain mostly solves this problem - alas, it only supports 6502 and 65816. But I need Z80 (and hopefully 68k) support. Fellow assembly programmers may not feel as strongly about the issues mentioned above as I do. But I do. I will no longer suffer the tyranny of single namespaces and fixed addresses.

Now, if only there was a way for people to make their own assembler and linker (with Black Jack and hookers) ...

Wyvern: The Modular Assembler

So, I'm going to write my assembler and linker. Since the market for new assemblers is kind of small, I'll be arrogant enough to declare this to be a new type of assembler: the modular assembler!

[wow]

What is a modular assembler? A modular assembler does not allow you to use .include and .org (I really dislike those). But kidding aside, the idea is pretty simple: Each source file represents a module (or translation unit, if you like). A module, in turn, creates its own environment.

An environment is a sequence of frames. Frames are bindings between names and values - translated to assembly, we'd call names labels (or symbols sometimes), and the values they're associated with either constants or addresses (which essentially are the same thing; in the final step of assembling/linking, names/labels/symbols are replaced by the value they represent).

Now, what is the practical implication of this? The paragraph above is just a fancy way of saying that labels/symbols are unique to their respective frame, aka, you can reuse names within your assembly code. Let me illustrate that with an example.

Suppose you want to write a small math library like this:

[mul and div code]

This code will assemble with no problem with cc65. Why do the duplicate labels L1 and L2 do not cause any problems? Because they each form a frame. The instruction pair .proc and .endproc cause the assembler to create a new scope for the subroutine so that all labels used within it do not clash with those of the same name (and do not cause redefinition problems).

So, in Wyvern, the same code may look like this:

[mul div]

And to use this code in another file/module, you'd start that module like this:

[user]

The idea here is, that each module does not export any labels - unless the programmer explicitly requests it. It would also allow you to import multiple symbols of the same name and use fully qualified names to distinguish between subroutines of the same name from different modules:

[module example]

Hence, the modular assembler.

I believe this is preferable to simply designing code with unique labels. The programmer can more clearly convey their intentions on what the code at hand is supposed to achieve. It makes it easier to extend and integrate existing code without fear of a "polluted namespace".

The discerning Haskeller will notice a striking resemblance to Haskell modules. Coincidence? We'll never know.

Why Haskell

A functional language like Haskell is the best fit for a project like this. Parsing and interpreting is a major part of Haskell development - there are more than 200 libraries tagged parsing can be found.

Plus, I've never tackled anything serious with Haskell yet, so why not an assembler. Then I can finally start to program on Game Boy, Genesis, and other consoles I wish to explore (yet can't, because of bad assemblers - Game Boy Assembly Adventures anyone?).

Join me next time, when we write a simple Z80 scanner and parser in Haskell.




[1]: {% post_url snesaa/2018-07-28-snesaa01 %}.